In this video you are going to learn about graphing rational functions.
Fortunately it's not so difficult.
It's essentially just combining the knowledge that you learned about polynomials in the last section
of the course with what you learned about graphing.
So far in this section of the course and let me start by just talking a little bit about a rational
function now you might think that a rational function is a function that is purely logical it always
makes the best decisions it doesn't act on impulse or emotional mood swings or anything like that but
actually a rational function is not the same thing as a rational person a rational function actually
comes from the word ratio.
So a function is a rational if it's essentially a ratio of polynomials.
So this is an example of a rational function.
This is also an example of a rational function.
One plus the square root of X because that can actually be expressed as a ratio of one over the square
root of X to 1.
So just putting one in the denominator.
So here is a rational function.
This is a simple polynomial like the polynomials that I introduced in the previous section.
So this would be a degree to polynomial and you might recognize already the form so it's minus X squared.
So X squared generally looks like a bowl and then minus X squared which means it's a bowl opening down
and in fact the plot looks something like this.
And then the 2 here is basically just shifting this whole function up on the y axis here.
So the way to plot a rational function in python using map plot lib is essentially by generating a couple
of points in the function and then evaluating those points and drawing a line between them.
So it would look like this and in fact I'm going to start by generating exactly that same plot that
I showed in the slides.
So let's see we are definitely going to need num pi and Matt plot lib in this video.
So I'm going to specify the x axis is going to go from minus three to plus three which means I have
to specify this as four and then I'm going to run this first example generating this function point
by point.
So what I need to do first is initialize the vector of y points I'll say num pi dot zeros and that's
going to be length of X or before actually moving forward.
Let me show you what X and Y are.
So here is X that's a range from minus three to plus three and then we add one here and then Y is a
bunch of zeros and it's the same size or it has the same number of zeros as the length of X..
Okay.
And so what I'm going to do now is loop through all of the values of x in this range and then replace
each of these zeros with the actual value of the function at that point of X..
So for I in range 0 to the length of x we say that the ISF element in Y is equal to basically the function
definition.
So 2 minus X and then it's the ISF element of X squared.
Okay.
And then we are going to plot this.
So peel T dot plot x by y and I will make this squares with lines connecting the squares.
All right.
So there you go.
That looks like a nice plot.
Now you could embellish this a little bit more you know you could spend some time making this plot look
a bit nicer you could draw some grid lines and x and y axis labels and so on.
By this point in the course you know enough to be able to beautify this plot a bit on your own.
Instead I would like to move on and show you a little bit more about plotting functions and in particular
the next thing I would like to discuss is the resolution here or the number of points that are on this
graph so let's plot another function.
How about Y equals two plus the square root of x.
Actually the square root of the absolute value of X..
So it's a bit similar to a function that we plotted in one of the previous videos.
Okay.
Now notice that I'm actually specifying the entire function on one line here.
So this is different from evaluating the function one point at a time.
Now there isn't really a general reason to prefer one method over the other method in certain circumstances
you will find that it's useful to generate functions one point at a time and other cases it's useful
to specify the function all at once.
So I'm going to say that X equals and now I would like to basically change the resolution of these dots.
X is gonna go from minus three to plus three.
But I want to be able to specify how many points there are between minus three and plus three and to
do this.
I'm going to use a function in the NUM pi module called Lin space and the way that the Lin space function
works is that you provide three inputs the first input is the lower bound.
The second input is the upper bound and the third input is the number of steps between minus three and
plus three.
So let me print this out so you can see what this will look like.
So you can see that we have numbers from minus three going up to plus three and now there are ten of
them.
So I can make this be 20 numbers between minus three and plus three and so on.
So now that I have this specified I'm going to make a plot of this function so plot x by y and let's
also make this squares with lines.
But I think I'm gonna say m for magenta all right so this looks pretty interesting.
This is our plot of the square root of the absolute value of X so it kind of comes down and then it's
flat at the bottom and then it goes back up.
Now what would happen if we changed the Axis limits a bit.
So for example if we would make this block generate from minus three to plus four.
Huh.
So now we actually don't get that flat plateau at the bottom now it just comes down to a point.
Now maybe there's something about the resolutions.
So what if we were to say how about 14.
So now you know the plot generally has this same form.
But when I change these parameters and particularly when I change the resolution of X it kind of seems
like in the middle it's changing a little bit the function seems to be changing a little bit and actually
what's happening here is that this plot is not really showing the function itself.
Instead it's showing just a collection of data points evaluated somewhere on that function.
So therefore these straight lines in between them are a little bit misleading because it suggests that
the function actually is straight from one point to the next point.
Now as long as the points are sufficiently close together that's not really a problem.
And in fact you will learn later on in this course that linear functions which is essentially what we're
doing here are actually really good approximations of nonlinear functions which is what this is.
As long as the linear spacing is close enough so we can make this even higher resolution.
And now this line this estimate of the function the square root of the absolute value of X starts to
look more and more like the real function.
And also by the way the more points we add the more kind of annoying it looks with these squares.
So maybe it's better if we remove this s and just leave this as a magenta line.
Now I would like to take a moment here before the exercise to illustrate to you one of the things that
I love about exploring mathematics with tools like Python or other numerical processing software is
if you would see this function here and you wanted to know a little bit more about this function and
all you had at your disposal was a piece of paper and a pencil.
It would basically take you a really long time to try and get more familiar with this function but in
Python it's really easy.
For example if you want to know what does this function look like if you subtract the square root.
Super easy All you have to do is change this line of code or even just this one character and then you
get to see that this starts to look like the roof of a house or something.
Maybe you're curious what happens if you say two times x minus the square root of the absolute value
of x and ha then it looks even more interesting or what if we would say two plus how about instead of
the square root of X we would make this b the cube root of x.
So to the power of one third.
Okay.
Well that one actually doesn't look so different.
Oh but maybe we can do something like this.
Maybe I can say why one and then why two and then will equal the square root of the absolute value of
x.
And now I can say why 1 and Y 2 will make Y to be a black line.
Aha.
So this is pretty interesting now you can see parts of the function look really similar and there's
only one piece of the function that I'm changing.
And you get to see how changing the fractional power of this function will change the resulting graph.
And that right there is the most powerful way to use Python to help you get an intuitive feel for mathematics.
And with that concept in mind your goal for this exercise is to produce a plot that looks like this.
I think this looks really neat.
This almost looks like it could be an icon for some hip software company or something.
So essentially this is a similar set of functions.
It's all Y equals X to the power of something and that something goes from minus 1 0 1 2 and 3.
So pause the video switch to Python and see if you can produce a plot that looks like this.
Of course I recommend running through this in a for loop to make this efficient All right.
So let's see the x axis was numbers that went from minus four to plus four.
And I don't really know what was the resolution that I showed in the slides so I'm going to start it
off with let's say just 10 points for starters and maybe I will need to increase that later.
Okay.
So then we're gonna have the exponents and I'll just call that E for exponents and that's going to be
in a range from minus 1.
And in the plot I went up to 4.
That's right up to the third power.
So here I write for.
Okay.
So now we're gonna have a for loop and this will save for I.
In ease is pretty compact coating here.
So let's specify that the function is X to the power to the power of I.
And then we plot this function.
So X comma Y and then we need a label and that label was Y equals X to the power of.
And then I'll do a percent s in here and then a percent.
I out here.
All right.
And then we need to activate the legend.
So plot that legend and actually know before going much further I think it's a good idea just to look
at this plot and see how it looks.
Okay.
So it's kind of it's it's getting there.
Let's see there's a few things that we need to fix here.
One is that the lines need to be a little bit thicker.
I mean is that why line with to be equal to four.
Now I want to adjust the x and y limits so let's set the X limit to be set according to this X limit
here.
And so that's going to be the first element of X or the first value of x.
And then the last value of X..
All right.
So this is getting somewhere it still doesn't quite look like the figure that I showed in the slides
but we're getting closer.
I'm also gonna set the Y limit and let's say you know this is getting a little bit out of hand here.
I'll say minus twenty two plus twenty so minus twenty two plus twenty.
All right.
So this doesn't quite this looks a little too rugged here.
So I think what we need to do is increase the spacing between minus four and plus four.
So how about instead of ten we try a hundred.
Huh.
This looks much better and now I'm curious to see if it gets any better or different.
If I set this to be a thousand.
Mm hmm.
It doesn't really look much different.
I wonder if I can just set it to maybe 200.
Yeah.
So you can see at some point you get up to the resolution that is sufficient.
And then adding more data points is basically just going to make the computation take longer without
really adding any new information.
Okay.
So this generally looks pretty good.
The last thing I want to do is convert this into latex.
So it looks a little bit nicer in particular I want these exponents to be in these superscript.
So here when you are using LaTeX in a label for a legend or in a title you can actually just in case
everything in dollar signs like this.
And that means that we use the latex code for super scripts in which is the carat symbol.
All right.
So now this looks quite good.
So what a fun video this was wasn't it.
I hope you enjoyed it as much or maybe even more than I did.
So I told you about rational functions and a little bit more about plotting but I hope that the most
important take home message for you from this video was how to interact with Python and how to change
functions so that by visualizing functions and changing the arithmetic of functions you get a better
feel for the underlying mathematics.